Docs: Revise IAM policies with more information (#989)
redpanda-data/documentation: modules/manage/pages/iceberg/topic-iceberg-integration.adoc

:page-categories: Iceberg, Tiered Storage, Management, High Availability, Data Replication, Integration
:page-aliases: manage:topic-iceberg-integration.adoc

[NOTE]
====
include::shared:partial$enterprise-license.adoc[]
====

The Apache Iceberg integration for Redpanda allows you to store topic data in the cloud in the Iceberg open table format. This makes your streaming data immediately available in downstream analytical systems, including data warehouses like Snowflake, Databricks, ClickHouse, and Redshift, without setting up and maintaining additional ETL pipelines. You can also integrate your data directly into commonly-used big data processing frameworks, such as Apache Spark and Flink, standardizing and simplifying the consumption of streams as tables in a wide variety of data analytics pipelines.

The Iceberg integration uses xref:manage:tiered-storage.adoc[Tiered Storage]. When a cluster or topic has Tiered Storage enabled, Redpanda stores the Iceberg files in the configured Tiered Storage bucket or container.

Redpanda supports https://iceberg.apache.org/spec/#format-versioning[version 2^] of the Iceberg table format.

== Iceberg concepts 

> https://iceberg.apache.org[Apache Iceberg^] is an open source format specification for defining structured tables in a data lake. The table format lets you quickly and easily manage, query, and process huge amounts of structured and unstructured data. This is similar to the way in which you would manage and run SQL queries against relational data in a database or data warehouse. The open format lets you use many different languages, tools, and applications to process the same data in a consistent way, so you can avoid vendor lock-in. This data management system is referred to as a _data lakehouse_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
https://iceberg.apache.org[Apache Iceberg^] is an open source format specification for defining structured tables in a data lake. The table format lets you quickly and easily manage, query, and process huge amounts of structured and unstructured data. This is similar to the way in which you would manage and run SQL queries against relational data in a database or data warehouse. The open format lets you use many different languages, tools, and applications to process the same data in a consistent way, so you can avoid vendor lock-in. This data management system is known as a _data lakehouse_.
```
your choice: this is just my preference! And not necessary now, but we could add Iceberg concepts in glossary.

Reviewer: Also, below: I don't think I'd itemize "Data files: Store the data...."since there's only one item. I'd put it on the same line, like: "Data layer: Stores the data in data files..."

Reviewer 2: Updated

** Metadata file: Stores metadata about the table, including its schema, partition information, and snapshots. Whenever a change is made to the table, a new metadata file is created and becomes the latest version of the metadata in the catalog.
--
+
For Iceberg-enabled topics, the manifest files are in JSON format.

> * Catalog: Contains the current metadata pointer for the table. Clients reading and writing data to the table see the same version of the current state of the table. The Iceberg integration supports two xref:manage:iceberg/access-iceberg-topics.adoc[catalog integration] types. You can configure Redpanda to catalog files stored in the same object storage bucket or container where the Iceberg data files are located, or you can configure Redpanda to use an https://iceberg.apache.org/concepts/catalog/#decoupling-using-the-rest-catalog[Iceberg REST catalog^] endpoint to update an externally-managed catalog when there are changes to the Iceberg data and metadata.

Reviewer: Please check the Iceberg REST catalog link!

Reviewer 2: Updated

== Prerequisites

To enable Iceberg for Redpanda topics, you must have the following:

* *rpk*: See xref:get-started:rpk-install.adoc[].
* *Enterprise license*: To check if you already have a license key applied to your cluster:
+
[,bash]
----
rpk cluster license info
----
* *Tiered Storage*: Enable xref:manage:tiered-storage.adoc#set-up-tiered-storage[Tiered Storage] for the topics for which you want to generate Iceberg tables.

== Limitations

* It is not possible to append topic data to an existing Iceberg table that is not created by Redpanda.
* If you enable the Iceberg integration on an existing Redpanda topic, Redpanda does not backfill the generated Iceberg table with topic data.
* JSON schemas are not currently supported. If the topic data is in JSON, use the `key_value` mode to store the JSON in Iceberg, which then can be parsed by most query engines.

> * If you are using Avro or Protobuf data, you must use the Schema Registry wire format, where producers include the magic byte and schema ID in the message payload header. See also: xref:manage:schema-reg/schema-id-validation.adoc[] and the https://www.redpanda.com/blog/schema-registry-kafka-streaming#how-does-serialization-work-with-schema-registry-in-kafka[Understanding Apache Kafka Schema Registry^] blog post to learn more about the wire format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If you're using Avro or Protobuf data, you must use the Schema Registry wire format, where producers include the magic byte and schema ID in the message payload header. See also: xref:manage:schema-reg/schema-id-validation.adoc[] and the https://www.redpanda.com/blog/schema-registry-kafka-streaming#how-does-serialization-work-with-schema-registry-in-kafka[Understanding Apache Kafka Schema Registry^] blog post to learn more about the wire format.
```

** Metadata file: Stores metadata about the table, including its schema, partition information, and snapshots. Whenever a change is made to the table, a new metadata file is created and becomes the latest version of the metadata in the catalog.
--
+

> For Iceberg-enabled topics, the manifest files are in JSON format.

Reviewer: Some general comments about this page: 

- I'd move the Iceberg concepts section to the top, above Prerequisites.
- For heading consistency, I'd rename "Schema support and mapping" to "Configure schema support and mapping"
- I'd introduce the prereqs similar to [this](https://docs.redpanda.com/current/manage/kubernetes/k-manage-topics/#prerequisites); e.g.,
-- **rpk**: See Install or Update rpk
-- **Enterprise license**: To check...
-- **Tiered Storage**: To enable...

Reviewer: Also, the image on this page seems extra large

Reviewer 2: Updated per comments, although image resize is still pending

+
[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
TOPIC              STATUS
<new-topic-name>   OK
----
+
To improve query performance, consider implementing custom https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/nightly/partitioning/[partitioning^] for the Iceberg topic. Use the xref:reference:properties/topic-properties.adoc#redpand-aiceberg-partition-spec[`redpanda.iceberg.partition.spec`] topic property to define the partitioning scheme:
+
[,bash,]
----
# Create new topic with five topic partitions, replication factor 1, and custom table partitioning for Iceberg
rpk topic create <new-topic-name> -p5 -r1 -c "redpanda.iceberg.partition.spec=(<partition-key1>, <partition-key2>, ...)"
----
+
Valid `<partition-key>` values include a source column name or a transformation of a column. The columns referenced can be Redpanda-defined (such as `redpanda.timestamp`) or user-defined based on a schema that you register for the topic. The Iceberg table stores records that share the same partition key values in the same files based on this specification. 
+
For example: 
+
--

> * To partition the table by a single key such as a column `col1`, use: `redpanda.iceberg.partition.spec=(col1)`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* To partition the table by a single key, such as a column `col1`, use: `redpanda.iceberg.partition.spec=(col1)`. 
```

> * To partition by multiple columns, use a comma separated list: `redpanda.iceberg.partition.spec=(col1, col2)`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* To partition by multiple columns, use a comma-separated list: `redpanda.iceberg.partition.spec=(col1, col2)`. 
```

> * To partition by the year of a timestamp column `ts1` and `col1`, use: `redpanda.iceberg.partition.spec=(year(ts1), col1)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* To partition by the year of a timestamp, such as column `ts1` and `col1`, use: `redpanda.iceberg.partition.spec=(year(ts1), col1)`.
```

> * To partition by the year of a timestamp column `ts1` and `col1`, use: `redpanda.iceberg.partition.spec=(year(ts1), col1)`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* To partition by the year of a timestamp column `ts1`, and a string column `col1`, use: `redpanda.iceberg.partition.spec=(year(ts1), col1)`.
```

> For details on the partitioning specification, including allowed transforms, see the https://iceberg.apache.org/spec/#partitioning[official Apache Iceberg documentation^].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For details on the partitioning specification, including allowed transforms, see the https://iceberg.apache.org/spec/#partitioning[Apache Iceberg documentation^].
```

+
[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
SUBJECT          VERSION   ID   TYPE
<subject-name>   1         1    PROTOBUF
----

The Iceberg table is inside a namespace called `redpanda`, and has the same name as the Redpanda topic name. As you produce records to the topic, the data also becomes available in object storage for consumption by Iceberg-compatible clients. You can use the same analytical tools to xref:manage:iceberg/query-iceberg-topics.adoc[read the Iceberg topic data] in a data lake as you would for a relational database.

== About schema support and translation to Iceberg format

> The xref:reference:properties/topic-properties.adoc#redpanda-iceberg-mode[`redpanda.iceberg.mode`] property determines how Redpanda maps the topic data to the Iceberg table structure. You can either have the generated Iceberg table match the structure of a Avro or Protobuf schema in the Schema Registry, or use the `key_value` mode where Redpanda stores the record values as-is in the table. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The xref:reference:properties/topic-properties.adoc#redpanda-iceberg-mode[`redpanda.iceberg.mode`] property determines how Redpanda maps the topic data to the Iceberg table structure. You can either have the generated Iceberg table match the structure of a Avro or Protobuf schema in the Schema Registry, or you can use the `key_value` mode where Redpanda stores the record values as-is in the table. 
```

> The xref:reference:properties/topic-properties.adoc#redpanda-iceberg-mode[`redpanda.iceberg.mode`] property determines how Redpanda maps the topic data to the Iceberg table structure. You can either have the generated Iceberg table match the structure of a Avro or Protobuf schema in the Schema Registry, or use the `key_value` mode where Redpanda stores the record values as-is in the table. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The xref:reference:properties/topic-properties.adoc#redpanda-iceberg-mode[`redpanda.iceberg.mode`] property determines how Redpanda maps the topic data to the Iceberg table structure. You can have the generated Iceberg table match the structure of a Avro or Protobuf schema in the Schema Registry, or you can use the `key_value` mode where Redpanda stores the record values as-is in the table. 
```

> The JSON Schema format is not supported. If your topic data is in JSON, it is recommended to use the `key_value` mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The JSON schema format is not supported. If your topic data is in JSON, it is recommended to use the `key_value` mode.
```

Reviewer 2: This is kind of a weird one because the official name of the format is "JSON Schema," but when it is part of the group of formats (Avro, Protobuf, JSON Schema) we use lowercase and let "schemas" refer to the collective. I'll keep the capitalization since we already use "JSON Schema" in our other docs.

  ]
}
----
The `ts` field can be either null or a string representing a date. The default value is null.

[,bash]
----
rpk registry schema create demo-topic-value --schema schema_2.avsc

echo '{"user_id":858, "event_type":"BUTTON_CLICK", "ts":{"string":"2025-02-26T20:05:23.230ZZ"}}' | rpk topic produce demo-topic --format='%v\n' --schema-id=topic
----

xref:manage:iceberg/query-iceberg-topics.adoc[Querying the Iceberg table] for `demo-topic` includes the new column `ts`:

[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
+---------+--------------+--------------------------+
| user_id | event_type   | ts                       |
+---------+--------------+--------------------------+
| 858     | BUTTON_CLICK | 2025-02-26T20:05:23.230Z |
| 23      | BUTTON_CLICK | NULL                     |
+---------+--------------+--------------------------+
----

== Manage dead-letter queue

Errors may occur when translating records in the `value_schema_id_prefix` mode to the Iceberg table format; for example, if you do not use the Schema Registry wire format with the magic byte, if the schema ID in the record is not found in the Schema Registry, or if an Avro or Protobuf data type cannot be translated to an Iceberg type.

> If Redpanda encounters an error while writing a record to the Iceberg table, Redpanda writes the record to a separate dead-letter queue (DLQ) Iceberg table named `<topic-name>~dlq`. To disable the default behavior for a topic and drop the record, set the xref:reference:properties/topic-properties.adoc#redpandaiceberginvalidrecordaction[`redpanda.iceberg.invalid.record.action`] topic property to `drop`. You can also configure the default cluster-wide behavior for invalid records by setting the config_ref:iceberg_invalid_record_action,true,properties/cluster-properties[`iceberg_invalid_record_action`] property.

Reviewer: Please check link for iceberg_invalid_record_action property.

Reviewer 2: This link will work when the RC is available and we can extract the cluster config property reference/

The DLQ table itself uses the `key_value` schema, consisting of two columns: the record metadata including the key, and a binary column for the record's value.

> You can inspect the DLQ table for records that failed to write to the Iceberg table, allowing you to take further action on these records such as transforming and reprocessing them, and debugging issues that may have occurred upstream.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can inspect the DLQ table for records that failed to write to the Iceberg table, and you can take further action on these records, such as transforming and reprocessing them, or debugging issues that occurred upstream.
```

=== Reprocess DLQ records

> If you produce the following record to a topic named `ClickEvent` topic, and do not use the Schema Registry wire format that includes the magic byte and schema ID:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example produces a record to the `ClickEvent` topic and does not use the Schema Registry wire format that includes the magic byte and schema ID:
```
Not sure if that suggestion is correct, but this current example doesn't make sense to me. Also, in the text above, I'd add another "if" for readability: "for example, if you do not use the Schema Registry wire format with the magic byte, **if** the schema ID in the record is not found in the Schema Registry, or if an Avro or Protobuf data type cannot be translated to an Iceberg type."

+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
----

== Dead-letter queue

> Errors may occur when writing records to the Iceberg table; for example, if the record does not match the topic schema, or you do not use the Schema Registry wire format and the schema is not found, or if an Avro or Protobuf data type cannot be translated to an Iceberg type.

Reviewer 3: - Instead of "when writing" I'd replace it with "when translating kafka records into iceberg columnar data format"
- "if the record does not match the topic schema"—this seems wrong, but it also might be a feature I'm not familiar with 
  - From what I know, as far as the broker is concerned the shchema id should always be inside the record value. So we have the following failure scenarios:
    - The topic is configured with `value_schema_id_prefix` iceberg mode AND any of the following
      - The record value does not have the 1st magic byte set to `0x00`
      - The schema id in the record does not correspond to a schema in the registry (schema not found)
      - Record schema (avro, protobuf, ...) can't be converted to an equivalent iceberg schema
      - Inferred Iceberg schema is not compatible with the existing table iceberg schema (incompatible schema evolution)

Reviewer 3: Btw, this implies that DLQ tables are created only for topics with iceberg mode set to `value_schema_id_prefix`. For "key_value" mode DLQ doesn't apply as those can't fail translation.

Reviewer 2: Added some clarification

> If Redpanda encounters an error while writing a record to the Iceberg table, the record is dropped by default. To enable a dead-letter queue (DLQ) for these records, configure the config_ref:redpanda.iceberg.invalid.record.action,true,properties/topic-properties[] topic property. Redpanda writes these records to a separate Iceberg table named `<topic-name>~dlq`.

Reviewer 3: We default to DLQ starting 25.1!

Reviewer 3: I don't understand the syntax for config_ref in this documentation but the property can be set to "drop" or "dlq_table". We also have an equivalent cluster wide config `iceberg_invalid_record_action` which is used if per topic override is not set.
